# Measurement of Seasonal Variation 
There are three ways to measure seasonal variation, 
1. Averages of unadjusted data / Method of monthly (or quarterly) averages
2. Ratio to moving average 
3. Ratio to trend 

> **Note**
> Here we assume a multiplicative model unless stated otherwise 

## Averages of Unadjusted Data
When there is no trend or cyclical variation in the series then we use this method to find the seasonal variation. Here the only thing we have to eliminate are the irregular variations and that is done by averaging the monthly / quarterly / weekly values over different time points. 

Let $Y_{ij}$ be the observation for the $j^{\text{th}}$ month of the $i^{\text{th}}$ year.

$$\bar{Y_j} = \frac{\sum_{i} Y_{ij}}{\text{no. of years}}$$

This $\bar{Y_j}$ measures the seasonal component for the $j^{\text{th}}$ month, $j = 1,2,...,12$. To express $\bar{Y_j}$'s as seasonal indices, they should be expressed as percentages of a grand mean. 

$\therefore$ seasonal index for the $j^{\text{th}}$ month $$= \frac{\bar{Y_j}}{\bar{Y}} \cdot 100$$

Hence the total of seasonal indices for monthly data would add up to $1200$ and for quarterly data, it would be $400$. In general the sum of seasonal indices is given by $100 \times \text{no. of seasona}$. For additive model, the grand mean is to be subtracted from $\bar{Y_j}$ and the sum of all seasonal indices would be $0$.

## Ratio to Moving Average
This method is preferred when your data contains both trend and cyclical movement. 

Let $Y_{ij}$ be the observation for the $j^{\text{th}}$ month of the $i^{\text{th}}$ year. Given that we have have assumed a multiplicative model, $Y_{ij}$ is composed of $T_t\cdot S_t\cdot C_t\cdot I_t$. So from monthly data, we compute the moving averages as $y_{ij}$. This $y_{ij}$ gives a rough estimate of the combined effects of $T_t \& C_t$. 

Then the ratio $\frac{Y_{ij}}{y_{ij}}$ gives an estimate of the seasonal variation along with irregular variation for the $j^{\text{th}}$ month. 

$$\therefore r_{ij}'=\frac{Y_{ij}}{y_{ij}}\times 100$$

shows some variation from year to year. The values of $r_{ij}'$ for each month are averaged over the years to remove irregular fluctuations. 

i.e. we compute 

$\sum_{j}r_{j} \neq 1200$, the seasonal indices of monthly variations are then obtained by adjusting the $r_{j}'s$ to add upto $1200$


## Ratio to Trend

