# Tests of Randomness 
## Intro 
Given a sequence of coin toss $H, T, H, T, H, T$, could the process be considered random? Intuitively the answer is no. In a less extreme case, the randomness of such an arrangement could be tested statistically using the theory of runs. 

Suppose we have a set of observations $X_1, X_2, ...X_n$. We are to test 

$$H_0:\text{the set of observations are random}$$
$$\text{v/s}$$
$$H_0:\text{the set of observations are not random}$$

We replace each observation either by $'+'$ or $'-'$ sign depending on if it's larger or smaller than the median of the sample observations. And any observation equal to the medium is simply discarded. A *run* is defined to be a sequence of values of the same kind bounded by the values of the other kind. 

e.g, we have a sequence of outcomes, $++-+--+++-$ where $-$ is the first type of element and with $n_1 = 4$ and $+$ is the second type of element with $n_2 = 6$. So the total number of **runs** observed is $R=6$

Clues to lack randomness are exhibited by the existence of a definite pattern in the sequence. Both the number of runs and the lengths of the runs should exhibit some sort of pattern. Tests for randomness can therefore be based on either criterion or some combination thereof. Too few runs, too many runs of exssesive lengths, etc. can be used as a statistical criteria for rejection of randomness since these situations rarely occour in a truely random sequence. 

However the both too few runs or too many runs may indicate different types of lack of randomness since extremeness may also arise due to a highly skewed distribution. 

Tests of randomness are an important addition to statistical theory, because the theoretical basis for almost all the classical techniques begins with the assumption of a random sample. 

The signs studied for pattern may arise naturally or may be artificially imposed according to some dichotomizing criterion. Thus the runs tests are applicable to either qualitative or quantative data. When the data consists of numerical observations, two other types of runs analysis can be used to reach a conclusion about randomness. Both of these techniques use information about relative magnitudes of adjacent numbers in the time-ordered sequence. The techniques, called the *runs up and down test* and the *rank von Neumann test*, use more of the available information and are especially effective when the alternative hypothesis is either a trend or autocorrelation. 

## Test Based on The Total Number of Runs
Assume an ordered sequence of $n$ elements of two types, $n_1$ of the first type and $n_2$ of the second type, where $n_1 + n_2 =n$. If $r_1$ is the number of runs of type 1 elements	and $r_2$  is the number of runs of type 2, the total number of runs in the sequence is $r = r_1 + r_2$. In order to  derive a test for randomness based on the variable $R$, the total number of runs, we need the probability distribution of $R$ when the null hypothesis of ranomness is true. 

### Exact Null Distribution of R 
The distribution of $R$ will be found by first determining the joint distribution of $R_1$ and $R_2$ and then the distribution of their sum. Since under the null hypothesis every arrangement of the $n_1 + n_2$ 




