# Common Stochastic Processes
A list of some special stochastic processes and their properties 

## The Bernoulli process
The stochastic process $\left\{X_n:n=1,2,...\right\}$ is called a **Bernoulli process** with success probablity $p$ if,

1. $X_1, X_2, ...$ are independent 
2. $P(X_n = 1) = p. P(X_n = 0) = 1-p = q$. for all $n$

The Bernoulli process $\left\{X(n)\right\}$ has state space $S=\left\{0,1\right\}$ and index set $T=\left\{1,2,3,...\right\}$

## The Binomial process
Let $\left\{X_n:n=1,2,...\right\}$ be a Bernoulli process with success probability $p$ and let 
$$S=\left\{\begin{align} &0, &n=0 \\ &X_1+ X_2+..., &n = 1, 2, ...\end{align}\right.$$
Then $S_n$ is the number of successes in the first $n$ Bernoulli trials. Thus, 

$P\left(S_n=k\right)=\binom{n}{k}\cdot p^k\cdot (1-p)^{n-k}, \;\; k=0,1,...,n$

The stochastic process $\left\{S_n:n=1,2,...\right\}$ is called a **Binomial process**. The state space of the binomial process $\left\{S_n\right\}$ is $S=\left\{1,2,...,n\right\}$ while the index set is $T=\left\{1,2,...\right\}$

## The Poisson process
A poisson process of intensity $\lambda>0$ is an integer-valued stochastic process $\left\{N(t):t\geq 0\right\}$ with the following properties:

1. $N(0)=0$.
2. For $s>t,t>0$, the random variable $N(t+s)-N(t)$ has a Poisson distribution with parameter $\lambda s$.
3. $N(t)$ has independent increments. 

The state space of the Poisson process $\left\{N(t):t\geq 0\right\}$ is $S=\left\{n=0,1,2,...\right\}$. This is discrete and the index set $T$ is continous. The Poisson process arises in many applications. especially as a model for the arrival at a service point, eg., arrival of customers to a bank, arrival of calls at a telephone exchange, etc. 

## Gaussian Process
A stochastic process $\left\{X(t):t \geq 0\right\}$ is said to be Gaussian if the $n$-dimensional random variable $\left\{ X(t_1),X(t_2),...,X(t_n)\right\}$ has the multivariate normal distribution for all $n\geq 1$ and all $t_1, t_2,..., t_n\in \left[0, \infty\right)$. This process has a continous state space and a continous index set. In electrical engineering, Gaussian process is used as a model for noise in recievers and noise voltages in resistors. 

## Weiner Process
A stochastic process $\left\{W(t):t \geq 0\right\}$  is a **Weiner process** if it satisfies the following properties:

1. $W(0)=0$.
2. $\left\{W(t)\right\}$ has stationary and independent increments.
3. For all $t>0$, $W(t)$ is $N(0,c^2t)$, where $c$ is constant.

The process has continous state space and continous index set. It is sometimes called the **Brownian motion process** and has applications in quantum mechanics, diffusion phenomenon, economics, etc. 