# Tests of Randomness 
## Intro 
Given a sequence of coin toss $H, T, H, T, H, T$, could the process be considered random? Intuitively the answer is no. In a less extreme case, the randomness of such an arrangement could be tested statistically using the theory of runs. 

Suppose we have a set of observations $X_1, X_2, ...X_n$. We are to [[3. Hypothesis Testing|test]] 

$$H_0:\text{the set of observations are random}$$
$$\text{v/s}$$
$$H_0:\text{the set of observations are not random}$$

We replace each observation either by $'+'$ or $'-'$ sign depending on if it's larger or smaller than the median of the sample observations. And any observation equal to the medium is simply discarded. A *run* is defined to be a sequence of values of the same kind bounded by the values of the other kind. 

e.g, we have a sequence of outcomes, $++-+--+++-$ where $-$ is the first type of element and with $n_1 = 4$ and $+$ is the second type of element with $n_2 = 6$. So the total number of **runs** observed is $R=6$

Clues to lack randomness are exhibited by the existence of a definite pattern in the sequence. Both the number of runs and the lengths of the runs should exhibit some sort of pattern. Tests for randomness can therefore be based on either criterion or some combination thereof. Too few runs, too many runs of exssesive lengths, etc. can be used as a statistical criteria for rejection of randomness since these situations rarely occour in a truely random sequence. 

However the both too few runs or too many runs may indicate different types of lack of randomness since extremeness may also arise due to a highly skewed distribution. 

Tests of randomness are an important addition to statistical theory, because the theoretical basis for almost all the classical techniques begins with the assumption of a random sample. 

The signs studied for pattern may arise naturally or may be artificially imposed according to some dichotomizing criterion. Thus the runs tests are applicable to either qualitative or quantative data. When the data consists of numerical observations, two other types of runs analysis can be used to reach a conclusion about randomness. Both of these techniques use information about relative magnitudes of adjacent numbers in the time-ordered sequence. The techniques, called the *runs up and down test* and the *rank von Neumann test*, use more of the available information and are especially effective when the alternative hypothesis is either a trend or autocorrelation. 

## Test Based on The Total Number of Runs
Assume an ordered sequence of $n$ elements of two types, $n_1$ of the first type and $n_2$ of the second type, where $n_1 + n_2 =n$. If $r_1$ is the number of runs of type 1 elements	and $r_2$  is the number of runs of type 2, the total number of runs in the sequence is $r = r_1 + r_2$. In order to  derive a test for randomness based on the variable $R$, the total number of runs, we need the probability distribution of $R$ when the null hypothesis of ranomness is true. 

### Exact Null Distribution of R 
The distribution of $R$ will be found by first determining the joint distribution of $R_1$ and $R_2$ and then the distribution of their sum. Since under the null hypothesis every arrangement of the $n_1 + n_2$ objects is equiprobable, the probability that $R_1 = r_1$ and $R_2 = r_2$ is the number of distinguishable arrangements $n_1+n_2$ objects with $r_1$ runs of type 1 and $r_2$ runs of type 2 objects divided by the total number of distinguishable arrangements, which is $n!/n_1!n_2!$ For the numerator quantity, the following count lemma can be used.

>#### Lemma 1
>*The number of distinguishable ways of distributing $n$-like objects into $r$ distinguishable cells with no cell empty is $\binom{n-1}{r-1}, n\geq r$*
>
>***Proof*** Suppose that the $n$-like objects are all white balls. Place these 	$n$ balls in a row and divide them into $r$ cells by inserting each of $r-1$ black balls between any two white balls in the line. Since there are $n-1$ positions in which each black ball can be placed, the total number of arrangements is $\binom{n-1}{r-1}$

For objects of type 1, $n_1$-like objects can be placed into $r_1$ cells, which can be done in $\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}$ ways. The same reasoning applies to get $r_2$ runs of the remaining $n_2$ objects.

The blocks of objects of type 1 and type 2 must alternate, and consequently either $r_1 = r_2$ or $r_1 = \pm r_2$. if $r_1 = r_2 +1$ then the sequence must begin with a run of type 1 and vice versa. But if $r_1 = r_2$ then the sequence can begin with a run of rither type. 

The total number of distinguishable arrangements starting with a run of type 1 is $\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\cdot \binom{n_2-1}{r_2-1}$. We have thus proved the following result.


>#### Theorem 1
>*Let $R_1$ and $R_2$ denote the respective numbers of runs of $n_1$ objects of type 1 and $n_2$ objects of type 2 in a random sample of size $n=n_1+n_2$. The joint probability distribution of $R_1$ and $R_2$ is
>$$f_{R_1,R_2(r_1, r_2)}=\frac{c\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\binom{n_2-1}{r_2-1}}{\binom{n_1+n_2}{n_1}} \begin{matrix}r_1=1,2,...n_1\\r_2=1,2,...n_2\\r_1=r_2 \text{ or } r_1\pm 1\end{matrix}$$
>where $c=2$ if $r_1=r_2$ and $c=1$ if $r_1=r_2\pm1$*

^2a469f

>#### Corollary 1
>*The marginal probabability distribution of $R_1$ is $$f_{R_1}=\frac{\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\binom{n_2+1}{r_1}}{\binom{n_1+n_2}{n_1}} \space\space r_1=1,2,...n_1$$
>Similarly for $R_2$ with $n_1$ and $n_2$ interchanged*
>
>***Proof*** From [[2. Tests of Randomness#^2a469f|Theorem 1]], the possible values of $r_2$ are $r_2=r_1, r_2-1$ and $r_1+1$ for any $r_1$, Therefore we have $$f_{R_1}(r_1)=\sum_{r_2}f_{R_1 R_2}(r_1, r_2)$$
>
>$$\binom{n_1+n_2}{n_1}f_{R_1}(r_1)=2\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\binom{n_2-1}{r_2-1}+\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\binom{n_2-1}{r_1-2}+\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}+$$$$\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\binom{n_2-1}{r}$$
>$$=\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\left[\binom{n_2-1}{r_1-1}+\binom{n_2-1}{r_1-2}+\binom{n_2-1}{r_1-1}+\binom{n_2-1}{r_1}\right]$$
>$$=\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\left[\binom{n_2}{r_1-1}+\binom{n_2}{r_1}\right]$$
>$$=\binom{n_1-1}{r_1-1}\binom{n_2+1}{r_1}$$

>#### Theorem 2
>*The probability distribution of $R$, the total number of runs of $n=n_1 + n_2$ objects, $n_1$ of type 1 and $n_2$ of type 2, in a random sample is*
>
>$$f_R(r)=\left\{ \begin{align} &2\binom{n_1-1}{r/2-1}\binom{n_2-1}{r/2-1}\Bigg/\binom{n_1+n_2}{n_1} & r\text{ is even}\\ &\left[\binom{n_1-1}{(r-1)/2}\binom{n_2-1}{(r-3)/2}+\binom{n_1-1}{(r-3)/2}\binom{n_2-1}{(r-1)/2}\right]\Bigg/\binom{n_1+n_2}{n_1} & r\text{ is odd}\end{align}\right.$$$$\text{ for } r=2,3,...n_1+n_2$$
>***Proof*** For $r$ even, there must be the same number of runs of both types. Thus the only possible values of $r_1$ and $r_2$ are $r_1=r_2=r/2$, and $f_{R_1,R_2}(r_1,r_2)$ is summed over this pair. If $r_1=r_2\pm 1$, $r$ is odd. In this case, $f_{R_1,R_2}(r_1,r_2)$ is summed over the two pairs of values $r_1=(r-1)/2$ and $r_2=(r+1)/2$, $r_1=(r+1)/2$ and $r_2=(r-1)/2$, obtaining the given results.

>**Note** 
>$\binom{a}{b} = 0$ if $a<b$

<!--
Include examples
Add tables
-->